Doc/wasm (#3239)
vectorizedio/redpanda: docs/www/data-transform.md

With Redpanda, you can now deploy custom Node.js programs to handle the entire consume-transform-produce cycle for you.

We do all of this co-processing using a new transformation engine built on-top of [WASM (WebAssembly)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) technology.

All you need to do is to provide:
- A JavaScript code that transforms the data. 
- The source topics where to consume from.
  
The destination topics can be generated on demand when your transformation runs. 

You can jump start your data transformation development with `rpk`. We provide a sample Node.js project so you can start developing right away. Then you can deploy the data transform to Redpanda for all of the brokers to run.

Be aware that even though we're referring to this feature as data transformation, the Kafka topics are still immutable. 
What happens under the hood, is that we're reading from an immutable Kafka topic, applying a data transformation process and then we producing to another immutable Kafka topic.
Your data is never actually transformed, but rather read and written again. 

> ## Enable data transforms

Reviewer: @VadimPlh makes a good point that we should suggest that `auto_create_topics_enabled` is set to `False`. It prevents someone from accidentatially creating the expected output topic as a normal topic because your coprocessor attempts to create it from scratch.

If this does occur coproc will complain that you are attempting to push data to a normal topic that already exists. @coral-waters

Reviewer 2: Addressed in my comment on line 33.

To enable the coprocessor that runs the data transformation you need to enable the engine in the Redpanda configuration file. 

> In your `redpanda.yaml` file (which the default path is `/etc/redpanda/redpanda.yaml`) add these **required** flags under `redpanda`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In your `redpanda.yaml` file (which the default path is `/etc/redpanda/redpanda.yaml`) you must first set the `auto_create_topics_enabled` parameter to `true`. The default for this parameter is `false`. The default is set to `false` to prevent a user from accidentally creating the output topic as a normal topic because the coprocessor attempts to create it from scratch. If `auto_create_topics_enabled` is set to `false`, the coproc will return an error that you are attempting to push data to a normal topic that already exists. 

In addition, you must add these **required** flags under `redpanda` in the `redpanda.yaml file`.
```

@graphcareful @VadimPlh - I pretty much just copied what you said. But does this text work?

  enable_idempotence : false  ## this flag is also mandatory because we're running a tech preview
  coproc_engine:
  logFilePath: <file_path>    ## remember to change the file_path
  coproc_supervisor_server:
    address: 0.0.0.0          ## if you want, you can change the ip address here
    port: <new port>          ## remember to change the port here
  kafka_api:
  - address: 0.0.0.0
    port: 9092
  node_id: 0
  rpc_server:
    address: 0.0.0.0
    port: 33145
  seed_servers: []
rpk:
  coredump_dir: /var/lib/redpanda/coredump
  enable_memory_locking: false
  enable_usage_stats: false
  overprovisioned: false
  tune_aio_events: false
  tune_ballast_file: false
  tune_clocksource: false
  tune_coredump: false
  tune_cpu: false
  tune_disk_irq: false
  tune_disk_nomerges: false
  tune_disk_scheduler: false
  tune_disk_write_cache: false
  tune_fstrim: false
  tune_network: false
  tune_swappiness: false
  tune_transparent_hugepages: false
schema_registry: {}
```

Save your changes and then restart Redpanda.

If you're running it as a service, you can restart it by running this command: 

```bash
systemctl restart redpanda
```

## Generating the data transform package

> The data transform is packaged in a Node.js project and uses the WASM (WebAssembly) instruction format.

Reviewer 2: Wasm is not all caps - it should be Wasm
I think this occurs a few times in this doc.

Author: Other players have been using the term interchangeably (WASM and Wasm), but since [the original creators](https://webassembly.org/) refer to it was Wasm it's probably a good idea to change that as well. 

Addressing with the next force push.

---
title: Data transformation
order: 0
---
# Data transformation

> 

Reviewer 3: Add a separate line here: "Important: This feature is in technical preview; a cluster with this feature enabled is not yet supported for production. "

The basic process of streaming data is to have systems produce events to a topic

> and have other systems consume from that topic.

Reviewer: Opener sounds kinda generic maybe we can improve, @vsaraswat ideas?

Reviewer 3: I agree we should get straight to the point of the feature since most folks know what topics do at this point docs. Suggestion:
Redpanda Data Transforms enable users to create WebAssembly-based scripts to perform simple data transformations on topics. This eliminates the need to consume data streams from a separate system for simple transformations such as scrubbing or cleaning data.

What if you need to change the content of the events, or transform the events, 
in some way like scrubbing private data?
Normally you'd have to set up another process to consume the events, transform them,
and produce them to another topic that your consumers can consume from.
That's extra overhead of code, integration, monitoring, and performance load that you'd like to avoid if possible.

> With Redpanda, you can setup a process in Node.js and it will do all of the consume-transform-produce cycle for you.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Redpanda, you can now deploy custom Node.js programs to handle the entire consume-transform-produce cycle for you.
```

> We do all of this co-processing using a [WASM (WebAssembly)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) engine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We do all of this co-processing using a new transformation engine built on-top of [WASM (WebAssembly)](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) technology.
```

All you need to do is to provide:

> - A JavaScript code that transforms the data. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Your Javascript program that transforms the data. 
```

> - The source topics where to consume from.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Specify what source topics the program will receive data from.
```

> - The destination topics where produced data will be stored. 

Reviewer: Maybe this can be omitted. It might be confusing because it may seem like the user needs to provide up-front the list of destination topics, but that isn't necessary. They are created on demand by parsing the return value of the `apply()` function.

Author: ```suggestion

All you need to do is to provide:

- A JavaScript code that transforms the data. 
- The source topics where to consume from.

The destination topics can be generated on demand when your transformation runs. 
```

You can jump start your data transformation development with `rpk`. We provide a sample Node.js project so you can start developing right away. Then you can deploy the data transform to Redpanda for all of the brokers to run.

Be aware that even though we're referring to this feature as data transformation, the Kafka topics are still immutable. 
What happens under the hood, is that we're reading from an immutable Kafka topic, applying a data transformation process and then we producing to another immutable Kafka topic.
Your data is never actually transformed, but rather read and written again. 

> **THIS FEATURE IS A TECHNICAL PREVIEW** - We don't provide official support for it nor do we recommend its use in production. 

Reviewer 3: Can delete this based on my comment above.

> To get up-to-date with what we're doing right now, and to meet other Redpanda users you can join [our Slack community](https://join.slack.com/t/vectorizedcommunity/shared_invite/zt-ng2ze1uv-l5VMWSGQHB9gp47~kNnYGA).

Reviewer 3: Do we commonly call out a link to our Slack community in docs feature pages? If not, can remove.

## Enable data transforms

To enable the coprocessor that runs the data transformation you need to enable the engine in the Redpanda configuration file. 

In your `redpanda.yaml` file (which the default path is `/etc/redpanda/redpanda.yaml`) add these **required** flags under `redpanda`.

```yaml
enable_coproc: true
developer_mode: true
enable_idempotence : false 
```

> You can change the port in which the coproc reads from. To achieve this add this section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can change the port in which the coproc reads from, this is entirely optional. To achieve this add this section:
```

```bash
rpk wasm -h
```

## The sample project

The sample project contains this `main.js` file:
```js
const {
  SimpleTransform,
  PolicyError,
  PolicyInjection
} = require("@vectorizedio/wasm-api");
const transform = new SimpleTransform();
/* Topics that fire the transform function */
transform.subscribe([["test-topic", PolicyInjection.Stored]]);
/* The strategy the transform engine will use when handling errors */
transform.errorHandler(PolicyError.SkipOnFailure);
/* Auxiliar transform function for records */
const uppercase = (record) => {
  const newRecord = {
    ...record,
    value: record.value.map((char) => {
      if (char >= 97 && char <= 122) {
        return char - 32;
      } else {
        return char;
      }
    }),
  };
  return newRecord;
}
/* Transform function */
transform.processRecord((recordBatch) => {
  const result = new Map();
  const transformedRecord = recordBatch.map(({ header, records }) => {
    return {
      header,
      records: records.map(uppercase),
    };
  });
  result.set("result-topic", transformedRecord);
  // processRecord function returns a Promise
  return Promise.resolve(result);
});
exports["default"] = transform;
```

> Let's dissect this file and understand what every line is doing here.

Reviewer: Love this section! +1

First we need to import these const from the WASM API.

```js
const {
  SimpleTransform,
  PolicyError,
  PolicyInjection
} = require("@vectorizedio/wasm-api");
```

We then create a constant variable to hold the function SimpleTransform. This is the main function that we're going to use in the project.

```js
const transform = new SimpleTransform();
```

> We fill the subscribe tuple with our topic, and the policy in which we're going to process new messages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We fill the subscribe list with our topic, and the policy in which we're going to process new messages.
```

```js
transform.subscribe([["test-topic", PolicyInjection.Stored]]);
```

To add multiple source topics, add the topic and policy as pairs:

```js

> transform.subscribe[[<topic>,<policy>],[<topic>,<policy>]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
transform.subscribe[[<topic1>,<policyA>],[<topic2>,<policyB>]]
```

```

> > **_Note_** - If the topic does not exist, you can face a deployment error. It's recommended to create a topic before you deploy your transformation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> **_Note_** - If the topic does not exist, you can face a deployment error. It's recommended to create all of your source topics before you deploy your transformation.
```

## Verify that the transform works

After the transform is deployed, Redpanda processes every event produced to the source topic
and runs the logic that is defined by the transform.

To see our sample transform in action:

1. Run: `rpk topic consume test_topic._result_`
2. Produce events to the source topic:
    a. In a second terminal run: `rpk topic produce test-topic`
    b. Enter text and press CTRL+D to send the event to the source topic.
3. In the terminal that shows the consumed events you’ll see the text that you produced but it is now formatted with uppercase characters.

## Clean up the transform

To stop a transform, you have to remove the transform from the cluster brokers.

For our sample transform, run: `rpk wasm remove uppercase`

The transform stops processing events and is removed.

## Source code

You can check what are all the possible export values in our [GitHub Page](https://github.com/vectorizedio/redpanda/blob/dev/src/js/modules/public/Coprocessor.ts).

The (API package)[https://www.npmjs.com/package/@vectorizedio/wasm-api] is published under npm.

## Final considerations

> Currently we only support Node.js but in the future, we're planning to add support for a complete WASM engine so that it can compile and run any WebAssembly binary on the fly. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently we only support Node.js but in the future, we're planning to add support for other supported WASM languages. 
```

### Running untrusted code

We do not recommend you to run untrusted code. The reason for this is that the service will be running with the same privileges as Redpanda and with permission to read your data. 

> The golden rule here is to only run code where you thrust the authors or that you wrote yourself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The golden rule here is to only run code where you trust the authors or that you wrote yourself.
```

### Under the hood

We create a global control topic for each Redpanda cluster with the name `coproceessor_internal_topic`. This is done to support any Kafka client so you don´t *need* to use `rpk`. If anyone publishes to this topic, it will invoke a deployer implicitly. You just need to publish with the same headers and the correct format that we use. 

### Scaling

If you execute different types of transformations in different topics it's more advantageous to have multiple deployments. Remember that every time a transformation happens, you're subscribing to a topic and producing to another. Even though this process is really fast because it happens inside Redpanda, there's still a processing overhead. 

### Tech Preview Caveats

> We don't use [Raft](https://raft.github.io/) to publish and replicate the data. So it's possible to have inconsistencies in some cases. For example, if you have a topic with a replication factor > 1 and you have stateful coprocessors that aren't idempotent producing different data onto these replication topics. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We don't use [Raft](https://raft.github.io/) to publish and replicate the data. The reason is because the same transform is applied locally on all nodes in y So it's possible to have inconsistencies in some cases. For example, if you have a topic with a replication factor > 1 and you have stateful or idempotent coprocessors producing different data onto these replication topics. 
```

Author: @graphcareful can you check again if this suggestion is correct? 
`The reason is because the same transform is applied locally on all nodes in y`  
looks like it's missing something

Reviewer: sorry! `all nodes in the closer`

The coprocessor currently doesn't have any system limits. For example there's not a limit in processing time, memory usage or number of topics created.

> The coprocessor doesn't save your state. In the case of a crash, for example, if you have a counter, you'll lose that counter. The best practice here is to always avoid stateful implementations. The only state that it's kept and checkpointed is the `PolicyInjection` variable. The semantics of your materialized topics is `At-Least-Once`. Redpanda saves the offset from wherever you were reading. In the case of a crash, your deployed code will be reprocessed, based on your `PolicyInjection` policy. If it's `PolicyInjection.Latest` for example, then it will be from whatever offset was saved before the crash.

Reviewer: Actually is Latest is chosen it won't re-process from whatever offset was saved before the crash it will be the actual current latest offset of the input topic. Saved picks up from where it left off after a crash.

Also maybe we don't want to say the `policyInjection` variable is saved but rather what it represents which is the source topic offset.

> It's not possible to pipeline multiple scripts so that you can do A->B->C->D. The API works only as topic-to-topic. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It's not possible to pipeline multiple scripts so that you can pass transforms through one another (such as A->B->C->D). The API only maps topic(s)-to-topic(s). 
```
